I am John Chilembwe, born in 1860,
Blantyre district, Nyasaland,
Current day Malawi. I am a missionary
who led an abortive, largely symbolic,
uprising against British rule in 1915 and am seen
as a forerunner and martyr of Malawi nationalism.
I was one of the first Africans to
speak of Nyasaland at a time when
the vast majority of my fellow subjects
cared only for tribal identification.
My first prolonged experience with Europeans was
from 1892 to 1895 as the servant and helper of an
egalitarian fundamentalist missionary, Joseph
Booth. I was proud and independent-minded,
but also eager to learn from whites and to
believe the best of them. In 1897 Booth took
me to the United States, where I received
a degree from a black theological college.
When I returned to Nyasaland in 1900, I founded
my Providence Industrial Mission to educate and
instill discipline and pride in the Nyasa
people of the district around Blantyre.
My revolt is thought to have been rooted in my
growing disgust with the wanton cruelty of white
rule, especially on white estates that had African
tenants and wage earners. A more immediate cause
was the British use of Nyasa soldiers against
the Germans in East Africa at the outbreak of
World War I. When no reply was forthcoming
to my written protest against conscription,
I and a few followers decided on an admittedly
suicidal blow. We attacked a notoriously brutal
estate, killing several managers and displaying
the severed head of one of them in a church.
My instructions not to harm women and
children were strictly followed. Lacking
support from other districts, the revolt quickly
collapsed, and I was shot by African police.
The revolt has been the subject of much research
and has been interpreted in various ways by
historians. It marked a turning point in colonial
rule. My face is inserted on all banknotes
in Malawi with respect to my sacrifice across
the nation. I gave my life to grant my people
the right to live. I hope my spirit is living in
Malawian’s hearts and inspires them to this day.